>> Suarez: THE PROSECUTION
WRAPPED UP ITS CASE AGAINST
GEORGE ZIMMERMAN TODAY, CHARGED
IN THE SHOOTING DEATH OF TRAYVON
MARTIN, AN UNARMED TEENAGER.
GOOD EVENING, I'M RAY SUAREZ.
>> Sreenivasan: AND I HAR'MI
SREENIVASAN.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, WE
GET THE LATEST ON THE TRIAL, AS
THE JUDGE TELLS THE JURY IT MAY
CONSIDER A VERDICT OF
MANSLAUGHTER INSTEAD OF SECOND
DEGREE MURDER.
>> Suarez: THEN, WE CONTINUE OUR
SERIES OF CONVERSATIONS ABOUT
IMMIGRATION REFORM.
TONIGHT, THE VIEW OF ARIZONA
DEMOCRAT RAUL GRIJALVA ON BORDER
SECURITY AND MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: FROM EGYPT,
LINDSEY HILSUM HAS THE HARROWING
STORY OF WOMEN SEXUALLY
ASSAULTED IN CAIRO'S TAHRIR
SQUARE.
>> THESE ATTACKS ARE PLANNED AND
SOMETIMES WOMEN THINK THAT THE
MEN COMING FOR THEM ARE TRYING
TO SAVE THEM FROM BEING
ASSAULTED BUIN FT ACT THEY TAKE
THEM AWAY AND ATTACK THEM AGAIN.
>> Suarez: WE UPDATE THE
INVESTIGATION INTO THE FIERY
EXPLOSION OF AN OIL TANKER TRAIN
THAT DERAILED IN THE CANADIAN
PROVINCE OF QUEBEC WITH 50
PEOPLE NOW CONFIRMED OR PRESUMED
DEAD.
>> Sreenivasan: AND PAUL SOLMAN
GOES OUT OF THIS WORLD AND INTO
A VIRTUAL ONE TO EXPERIENCE THE
HOLY GRAIL OF VIDEO GAMES.
>> SO NOW WHAT AM I DOING?
>> BASICALLY YOU'RE GOING TO FLY
AROUND LIKE SUPERMAN AND YOU'LL
TAKE OFF BY PUTTING YOUR ARMS
OVER YOUR HEAD.
>> OH, MY GOD!
OH, MY GOD!
>> Suarez: THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON
TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Sreenivasan: THE END GAME
BEGAN TODAY IN A RACIALLY
CHARGED, NATIONALLY WATCHED
TRIAL IN SANFORD, FLORIDA.
AT ISSUE: WHETHER GEORGE
ZIMMERMAN COMMITTED MURDER WHEN
HE SHOT AND KILLED TRAYVON
MARTIN.
THE PROSECUTION MADE ITS CLOSING
ARGUMENTS, AFTER THE JUDGE
ISSUED A KEY RULING ON WHAT THE
JURY'S OPTIONS WILL BE.
>> A TEENAGER IS DEAD.
HE IS DEAD THROUGH NO FAULT OF
HIS OWN.
HE IS DEAD BECAUSE ANOTHER MAN
MADE ASSUMPTIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: THE FINAL PHASE
OF THE TRIAL BEGAN THIS
AFTERNOON, AS PROSECUTOR BERNIE
DE LA RIONDA ADDRESSED THE JURY
A LAST TIME.
>> UNFORTUNATELY THIS IS ONE OF
THE LAST PHOTOS THAT WILL EVER
BE TAKEN OF TRAYVON MARTIN.
AND THAT IS TRUE BECAUSE OF THE
ACTIONS OF ONE INDIVIDUAL, THE
MAN BEFORE YOU, THE DEFENDANT
GEORGE ZIMMERMAN.
>> Sreenivasan: ZIMMERMAN HAD
BEEN ON PATROL, AS A
NEIGHBORHOOD WATCH VOLUNTEER,
WHEN HE SPOTTED 17-YEAR-OLD
TEEN-AGER TRAYVON MARTIN IN A
GATED COMMUNITY-- THE NIGHT OF
FEBRUARY 26, LAST YEAR.
ZIMMERMAN CALLED 9-1-1.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT HE DID
CONTINUE TRAILING MARTIN, AND A
CONFRONTATION ERUPTED. HE SHOT -
DEFENSE AFTER THE TEENAGER
ATTACKED HIM.
DE LA RIONDA INSISTED TODAY THAT
ZIMMERMAN WENT LOOKING FOR
TROUBLE.
>> WHY DOES THE DEFENDANT GET
OUT OF CAR IF HE THINKS THIS GUY
IS THREAT.
WHY, WHY?
BECAUSE HE HAS A GUN, HE HAS AN
EQUALIZER, HE'S GOING TO TAKE
CARE OF IT.
HE'S A WANNABE COP.
HE'S GOING TO TAKE CARE OF IT,
HE'S GOT A GUN AND, MY GOD, IT
IS HIS COMMUNITY.
AND HE'S NOT GOING TO PUT UP
WITH IT.
>> Sreenivasan: FROM THE START,
RACIAL OVERTONES CATAPULTED THE
CASE TO NATIONAL ATTENTION AND
TRIGGERED PROTESTS.
AND IN ITS CLOSING, THE
PROSECUTION CLAIMED AGAIN THAT
ZIMMERMAN PROFILED MARTIN.
>> IN THIS PARTICULAR CASE, IT
LED TO DEATH OF INNOCENT 17-
YEAR-OLD BOY.
BECAUSE THIS DEFENDANT MADE THE
WRONG ASSUMPTION.
HE PROFILED HIM AS A CRIMINAL.
HE ASSUMED CERTAIN THINGS THAT
TRAYVON WAS UP TO NO GOOD AND
THAT'S WHAT LED TO HIS DEATH.
>> Sreenivasan: DURING THE
TRIAL, JUDGE DEBRA NELSON
FORBADE USE OF THE TERM RACIAL
PROFILING OR ANY ARGUMENTS ABOUT
IT.
INSTEAD, THE MAJOR CONFLICTS IN
TESTIMONY CENTERED ON SUCH
SUEISS AS WHO HAD THE UPPER HAND
IN THE FIGHT.
YESTERDAY, LAWYERS ON BOTH SIDES
USED A FOAM DUMMY TO DEMONSTRATE
THEIR VERSION OF WHAT HAPPENED.
A FORENSIC PATHOLOGIST TESTIFIED
THE EVIDENCE SUGGESTS TRAYVON
MARTIN WAS ON TOP DURING THE
STRUGGLE.
>> SO THE WOUND ITSELF, BY THE
GAP BY THE POWDER TATTOOING IN
THE FACE OF THE CONTACT OF THE
CLOTHING, INDICATES THAT THIS IS
CONSISTENT WITH MR. ZIMMERMAN'S
ACCOUNT THAT MR. MARTIN WAS OVER
HIM, LEANING FORWARD AT THE TIME
HE WAS SHOT.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT EYEWITNESS
ACCOUNTS VARIED.
SOME NEIGHBORS RECALL SEEING
MARTIN ON TOP; OTHERS,
ZIMMERMAN.
THERE WERE ALSO ARGUMENTS OVER
WHO MADE THE CRY FOR HELP ON A
9-1-1 RECORDING DURING THE
FIGHT.
MARTIN'S MOTHER TESTIFIED IT WAS
HER SON'S VOICE.
>> MA'AM, THAT SCREAMING OR
YELLING, DO YOU RECOGNIZE THAT?"
>> YES.
>> AND WHO DO YOU RECOGNIZE THAT
TO BE, MA'AM?
>> TRAYVON BENJAMIN MARTIN.
>> IF IT WAS YOUR SON IN FACT
SCREAMING AS YOU TESTIFIED, THAT
WOULD SUGGEST THAT IT WAS MR.
ZIMMERMAN'S FAULT THAT LED TO
HIS DEATH, CORRECT.
>> CORRECT.
>> Sreenivasan: BUT ZIMMERMAN'S
MOTHER CLAIMED THE OPPOSITE,
SAYING THE SCREAM CAME FROM HER
SON.
>> WHAT I'M SURE IS THAT THAT'S
GEORGE'S VOICE.
THAT SCREAM IS... IS... I
HAVEN'T HEARD HIM LIKE THAT
BEFORE.
THE ANGUISH IN THAT SCREAM THAT
HE'S-- THE WAY THAT HE'S
SCREAMING IT DESCRIBES TO ME
ANGUISH, FEAR.
I WOULD SAY TERROR.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE END,
ZIMMERMAN CHOSE NOT TO TESTIFY
IN HIS OWN BEHALF.
ALONG THE WAY, THE JUDGE GRANTED
DEFENSE REQUESTS TO ALW TELOST
RESULTS SHOWING MARTIN HAD TRACE
AMOUNTS OF MARIJUANA IN HIS
SYSTEM ON THE NIGHT OF THE
SHOOTING.
BUT SHE BARRED TESTIMONY ABOUT
MARTIN'S PAST TEXT MESSAGE
RECORDS, SOME OF WHICH DISCUSSED
FIGHTING AND GUNS.
AND TODAY, SHE RULED THAT IN
ADDITION TO THE ORIGINAL CHARGE
OF SECOND DEGREE MURDER, THE
JURY WILL BE ALLOWED TO CONSIDER
A LESSER CHARGE OF MANSLAUGHTER.
DEFENSE CLOSING ARGUMENTS ARE
SET FOR TOMORROW, AND THEN, THE
CASE WILL GO TO THE SIX-PERSON,
ALL-FEMALE JURY.
>> Suarez: WE TURN TO YAMICHE
ALCINDOR WHO HAS BEEN FOLLOWING
THIS TRIAL FOR "USA TODAY" AND
WAS IN THE COURTROOM TODAY.
THAT HAVE'S WHERE YOU HEARD THE
PROSECUTION'S CLOSING ARGUMENT.
SUMMARIZE THE SUMMATION.
WHAT EVIDENCE DID BERNIE DE LA
RIONDA ASK THE JURY TO CONSIDER
IN HIS FINAL SHOT?
>> HIS OVERALL STATEMENTS WERE
THAT TRAYVON MARTIN WAS AN
INNOCENT KID, THAT HE WAS
WALKING HOME AND THAT HE WAS
DOING NOTHING WRONG.
SO THE EVIDENCE HE USED WERE
REALLY THE THINGS THAT TRAYVON
MARTIN WAS CARRYING.
HE TALKED ABOUT THE SKITTLES,
THE ICED TEA THAT THE COUNTRY'S
BEEN TALKING ABOUT FOR OVER A
YEAR AND HI SAID "THESE ARE NOT
WEAPONS."
THAT THIS WAS JUST SOMEONE
WALKING HOMELE FROM THE STORE.
HE ALSO USED TRAYVON MARTIN'S
BODY SAYING THAT TRAYVON DIDN'T
HAVE BLOOD ON HIS HANDS.
HE POINTED TO D.N.A. EVIDENCE
THAT SAID THERE WAS NO PRINTS
AND NO D.N.A. FOUND ON THE GUN.
SO THAT WAS FIND OF HOW HE USED
THE EVIDENCE BUT HIS MAININGMENT
WAS THAT THIS WAS A KID THAT WAS
WALKING HOME AND IT COULD HAVE
BEEN AVOIDED IF GEORGE ZIMMERMAN
HADN'T STOPPED AND GOTTEN OUT OF
HIS CAR.
>> Suarez: WITH A CHARGE OF
SECOND DEGREE MURDER, THE STATE
CARRIES A HEAVY BURDEN.
IT HAS TO DEMONSTRATE ILL WILL,
MALICIOUS INTENT.
WHAT COULD PROSECUTOR DE LA
RIONDA POINT TO BEFORE THE JURY
TODAY THAT SHOWED THAT KIND OF
MALICIOUS INTENT?
>> WELL, IT WAS REALLY
INTERESTING.
PROSECUTOR DE LA RIONDA REALLY
USED GEORGE ZIMMERMAN'S OWN
STATEMENTS AS AN OUTLINE FOR HIS
CLOSING ARGUMENT.
HE USED STATEMENTS FROM
ZIMMERMAN TO POLICE IN THIS
POLICE WALK THROUGH AS WELL AS
ON THE NIGHT OF THE SHOOTINGING.
AND HE ALSO USED ZIMMERMAN'S
CALL TO POLICE WHEN HE SPOTTED
TRAYVON MARTIN.
HE HAD THE JURY LISTEN TO GEORGE
ZIMMERMAN SAY SEVERAL TIMES --
USE THE WORD "A-HOLES" AND
"EFFING PUNKS" AND SAY THE
PEOPLE HE WAS TALKING ABOUT,
THOSE A-HOLES AFTER HE HAD SHOT
TRAYVON MARTIN HE SAID THERE
WERE PEOPLE VICTIMIZING HIS
NEIGHBORHOOD.
THIS IS, OF COURSE, AFTER THE
SHOOTING SO THE PROSECUTOR
REALLY TRIED TO USE ZIMMERMAN'S
OWN WORDS AGAINST HIM AND SPENT
A LOT OF TIME LETTING THE JURY
LISTEN TO HIM AND LETTING HIM
ALMOST SAY THE CASE FOR HIMSELF
AND ALMOST CONVICT HIMSELF IN
HIS OWN WORDS.
>> Suarez: TOMORROW WE'LL HEAR
THE DEFENSE'S FINAL ARGUMENT.
TELL US ABOUT THE THRUST OF
THEIR CASE.
THE SAME TWO PRINCIPALS: TRAYVON
MARTIN AND GEORGE ZIMMERMAN.
WHAT HAVE HAVE THEY BEEN TELLING
THE JURY OVER THE PAST WEEK?
>> THE DEFENSE'S CASE IS THAT
GEORGE ZIMMERMAN WAS A GOOD
NEIGHBOR.
THAT HE WAS INVOLVED IN HIS
NEIGHBORHOOD, THAT HE STARTED
THE NEIGHBORHOOD WATCH BECAUSE
THERE WERE REAL BURGLARIES GOING
ON, THAT HE WAS BEING A GOOD THT
IN THE MIDDLE OF HIM BEING A
GOOD CITIZEN HE CAME UPON
TRAYVON MARTIN WHO OVERREACTED
AND WHO PUNCHED HIM, SUCKER
PUNCHED HIM AND WHO THEN
ATTACKED HIM TO THE POINT THAT
HE HAD TO USE DEADLY FORCE.
SO THEIR CASE IS SIMPLE: THAT
GEORGE ZIMMERMAN WAS DOING
NOTHING WRONG AND THAT TRAYVON
MARTIN ALMOST -- THAT TRAYVON
MARTIN REALLY BEAT HIM AND
BECAUSE OF THAT HE HAD NO OTHER
CHOICE, NO OTHER OPTION THAN TO
SHOOT THE TEEN.
>> Suarez: EARLIER IN THE DAY
THE PUBLIC SAW-- BUT THE JURY
DIDN'T-- VERY TENSE EXCHANGES
BETWEEN THE ATTORNEYS AND THE
JUDGE ABOUT WHAT WOULD BE
ALLOWED IN THE CLOSING ARGUMENTS
AND ABOUT WHAT ULTIMATELY THE
JURY WOULD BE ABLE TO CONSIDER
AS FAR AS CHARGES OF GUILT OR
INNOCENCE.
TELL US ABOUT SOME OF THOSE
DELIBERATIONS.
>> SO THE JUDGE AND DON WEST,
WHICH IS ONE OF ZIMMERMAN'S
ATTORNEYS, TENSIONS WERE REALLY,
REALLY HIGH.
DURING SEVERAL HEARINGS DON WEST
WOULD BE ARGUING WITH THE JUDGE
AFTER SHE MADE HER RULING.
AT ONE POINT WHEN WE WERE
ACTUALLY IN COURT FOR 13 HOURS
ONE DAY DEBRA NELSON, JUDGE
DEBRA NELSON WALKED OUT AS DON
WEST WAS STILL TALKING.
HE WAS STILL TRYING TO MAKE AN
ARGUMENT AND SHE RECESSED THE
COURT AND DON WEST KEPT ON
TALKING.
TODAY I THINK I'VE SEEN PROBABLY
THE MOST TENSE EXCHANGE AFTER
WHEN SHE SAID "I'VE TOLD YOU
SEVERAL TIMES AND PROVIDED YOU
THE GUIDELINES TO PROFESSIONAL
BEHAVIOR IN MY COURTROOM AND YOU
CONTINUE TO NOT FOLLOW THEM."
BUT I DON'T REALLY SEE HER
MAKING THE -- USING THAT IN ANY
WAY AGAINST THE DEFENSE.
SHE'S STILL SAID THAT THE
PROSECUTORS COULDN'T USE THIRD
DEGREE MURDER TODAY.
SHE MADE SEVERAL DIFFERENT
RULINGS IN THE DEFENSE'S FAVOR
IN TERMS OF THE JURY
INSTRUCTIONS.
SO THOUGH SHE'S TENSE WITH DON
WEST, SHE'S STILL MAKING RULINGS
IN THE DEFENSE OF -- IN FAVOR OF
THE DEFENSE.
>> Suarez: DURING THE TRIAL,
THERE ARE PARTICULAR WITNESSES,
PARTICULAR EXAMINATIONS WHERE
THE JURY-- WHICH YOU WERE ABLE
TO OBSERVE A CLOSE QUARTERS--
WAS ENGAGED?
PAYING MORE ATTENTION?
THAT SEEMED TO BE CATCHING THEIR
INTEREST?
>> I THINK ANY TIME YOU HAD THE
LAWYERS OR PEOPLE OR OTHER
WITNESSES ACTUALLY ACTING OUT
WHAT COULD HAVE HAPPENED THAT
WAS WHEN THE JURY WAS MOST
INTERESTED.
THERE WERE TIMES WHEN THE JURY
STOOD UP, EVEN TODAY WHEN
PROSECUTOR DE LA RIONDA WAS ON A
MANNEQUIN STRADDLING, ASKING HOW
COULD TRAYVON MARTIN HAVE GOTTEN
THE GUN, I THINK THE JURY WAS
VERY VISUAL, IS THEY REALLY
LIKED BEING ABLE TO SEE THINGS
AND SEEING ALL THE DIFFERENT
POSSIBILITIES.
THEY WERE ALSO VERY ATTENTIVE
WHENEVER VIDEO WAS PLAYED FOR
THEM.
BUT WHEN THERE WAS SCIENTIFIC
TESTIMONY I COULD SEE SOME
JURIES KIND OF LOOKING AROUND,
SCANNING THE ROOM.
THAT'S WHEN I THINK THINGS
STARTED GETTING INTO THE WEEDS
AND JURORS WEREN'T FOLLOWING
ALONG AS CLOSELY.
>> Suarez: WELL, TOMORROW, AS I
MENTIONED, WE'LL HEAR THE
DEFENSE SUMMATION BUT ALSO
INSTRUCTIONS TO THE JURY AND
THERE WAS A LOT OF CONTENTION
DURING THE TRIAL ABOUT WHAT THE
JURY WILL BE TOLD TO CONSIDER.
WHAT THE K YOU TELL US ABOUT
THAT?
>> I KNOW THAT THERE WAS
DEFINITELY A LOT OF
BACK-AND-FORTH.
I CAN TELL YOU THAT THE JURY
WILL NOT BE HEARING THAT IT'S
NOT ILLEGAL TO FOLLOW SOMEONE.
ZIMMERMAN'S HAD REALLY SOUGHT TO
PUT THAT IN THERE AND THE JUDGE
DECIDED THAT SHE WASN'T GOING TO
TELL THE JURY THAT IT'S NOT
ILLEGAL TO FOLLOW SOMEONE.
SHE ALSO SAID SHE WOULDN'T PUT
ANY LANGUAGE IN THERE ABOUT
GEORGE ZIMMERMAN PROVOKING
TRAYVON MARTIN, EVEN THOUGH IT'S
STILL THEIR DECISION WHETHER OR
NOT THAT'S TRUE, SHE'S NOT GOING
TO MENTION THAT ISSUE AT ALL.
THOSE ARE THE THINGS THAT I
PICKED UP ON.
>> Suarez: THANKR
STILL TO COME ON THE "NEWSHOUR":
A LIBERAL DEMOCRATIC VOICE ON
IMMIGRATION; ATTACKS ON WOMEN IN
EGYPT'S TAHRIR SQUARE;
UNANSWERED QUESTIONS AFTER THE
CANADIAN TRAIN CRASH AND A NEW
LEVEL FOR VIDEO GAMES.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: THE U.S. HOUSE
NARROWLY PASSED A SCALED-DOWN
FARM BILL TODAY, AFTER DROPPING
FOOD STAMPS FROM THE MEASURE.
THE VOTE WAS 216 TO 208.
AN EARLIER VERSION FAILED LAST
MONTH WHEN MORE THAN 60
REPUBLICANS OPPOSED IT.
THEY ARGUED FOR DEEPER CUTS IN
FOOD STAMPS, WHICH COST $80
BILLION A YEAR-- OUT OF TOTAL
FARM SPENDING OF $100 BILLION A
YEAR.
TEXAS REPUBLICAN PETE SESSIONS
AND OTHERS SAID TODAY FOOD
STAMPS CAN WAIT, BUT FARM
PROGRAMS CAN'T.
>> IN NO WAY IS THE REPUBLICAN
PARTY TRYING TO DO ANYTHING MORE
IN THIS BILL THAT'S ON HERE
TODAY OTHER THAN TO BIFURCATE
AND TO PASS PIECES OF
LEGISLATION THAT THEN CAN  GO TO
CONFERENCE BUT WE HAVE TO FIND A
WAY TO PASS THE BILL.
THE SENATE HAS DONE THEIR WORK
AND FINISHED THEIR WORK.
WE ARE TRYING TO DO THE SAME.
>> Sreenivasan: DEMOCRATS
STRONGLY OPPOSED THE
STRIPPED-DOWN BILL, AS DID FARM
GROUPS AND EVEN SOME
CONSERVATIVE GROUPS.
CONGRESSMAN JIM McGOVERN OF
MASSACHUSETTS CONDEMNED
REPUBLICANS FOR PUTTING OFF
ACTION ON FOOD STAMPS.
>> IT'S ALL ABOUT GOING AFTER
AMERICANS WHO ARE STRUGGLING IN
POVERTY.
IT'S ALL ABOUT DENYING THE
WORKING POOR THE RIGHT TO FOOD.
SO WHEN WE'RE ASKED TO TRUST
REPUBLICAN LEADERS, TO GIVE THEM
THE BENEFIT OF THE DOUBT, I
CAN'T.
TRUST IS SOMETHING THAT IS
EARNED AND THE BEHAVIOR OF THIS
REPUBLICAN HOUSE TOWARDS
PROGRAMS THAT HELP THE WORKING
POOR, THE NEEDY, AND THE
VULNERABLE HAS BEEN APPALLING.
>> Sreenivasan: THE HOUSE BILL
WILL NOW HAVE TO BE RECONCILED
WITH THE SENATE VERSION, WHICH
DOES INCLUDE FOOD STAMP FUNDS.
IN IRAQ, BLOODSHED MARKED THE
BEGINNING OF THE ISLAMIC HOLY
MONTH OF RAMADAN.
AT LEAST 31 PEOPLE WERE KILLED
IN A SERIES OF ATTACKS.
ON WEDNESDAY EVENING, GUNMEN
STORMED AN ARMY CHECKPOINT AND A
POLICE OUTPOST IN ANBAR
PROVINCE, KILLING THREE SOLDIERS
AND 11 POLICEMEN.
TODAY, BOMBINGS AND SHOOTINGS
HIT SEVERAL MAJOR CITIES, ADDING
TO THE CASUALTIES.
A MOSCOW COURT HAS CONVICTED
SERGEI MAGNITSKY OF TAX EVASION,
MORE THAN THREE YEARS AFTER THE
ANTI-CORRUPTION LAWYER DIED IN
PRISON.
A CAGE FOR DEFENDANTS SAT EMPTY
AS THE JUDGE READ THE VERDICT.
THE CASE SPARKED U.S. SANCTIONS
AGAINST RUSSIA, AND IN TURN, A
KREMLIN BAN ON ADOPTIONS OF
RUSSIAN CHILDREN BY AMERICANS.
MAGNITSKY WAS ARRESTED IN 2008
AFTER HE  ACCUSED RUSSIAN
OFFICIALS OF STEALING STATE
FUNDS.
HIS DEATH PROMPTED
ALLEGATIONS THAT HE WAS BEATEN
AND DENIED MEDICAL TREATMENT IN
PRISON.
WALL STREET SURGED TODAY AFTER
REMARKS BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE
FEDERAL RESERVE.
IN A SPEECH LAST NIGHT, BEN
BERNANKE SAID THE CENTRAL BANK
WILL CONTINUE ITS STIMULUS
EFFORTS FOR THE FORSEEABLE
FUTURE.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
SHOT UP 169 POINTS TO CLOSE NEAR
15,461-- A NEW, ALL-TIME HIGH.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 57 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 3,578.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO RAY.
>> Suarez: AND WE CONTINUE OUR
LOOK AT IMMIGRATION REFORM, AS
G.O.P. LEADERS REPEATED FOR A
SECOND DAY IN A ROW THAT THERE'S
NO CLEAR CONSENSUS ON A PATH
FORWARD FOR COMPREHENSIVE
LEGISLATION.
>> WE GOT A BROKEN SYSTEM THAT
NEEDS TO BE FIXED, AND I MADE
>> Suarez: HOUSE SPEAKER JOHN
BOEHNER INSISTED TODAY THE VAST
MAJORITY OHOUSF E REPUBLICANS DO
WANT IMMIGRATION REFORM, BUT ON
THEIR TERMS.
>> THROUGH ALL THE CONVERSATIONS
THAT HAVE OCCURRED, WITH MY OWN
MEMBERS, WITH DEMOCRAT MEMBERS,
IT'S CLEAR THAT DEALING WITH
THIS IN BITE-SIZED CHUNKS THAT
MEMBERS CAN DIGEST AND THE
AMERICAN PEOPLE CAN DIGEST IS
THE SMARTEST WAY TO GO.
>> Suarez: IN OTHER WORDS, THE
HOUSE WILL NOT TAKE UP THE
COMPREHENSIVE BILL THAT PASSED
THE SENATE OR ANYTHING LIKE IT.
THAT BILL INCLUDES A PATH TO
CITIZENSHIP FOR SOME 11 MILLION
PEOPLE ALREADY IN THE COUNTRY
ILLEGALLY.
DEMOCRATS INSIST OINCLN UDING
THAT STEP.
HOUSE REPUBLICANS HAVE FOCUSED
INSTEAD ON BORDER SECURITY, BUT
THEY'RUNDEE R GROWING PRESSURE
TO RELENT ON THE CITIZENSHIP
QUESTION, AND, AFTER A TWO-HOUR
MEETG YEINSTERDAY, THEY
DISPLAYED A CONFERENCE DIVIDED.
>> THERE ARE THREE CATEGORIES
THAT THOSE 11 MILLION PEOPLE GO
INTO.
PEOPLE THAT WE ALL AGREE SHOULD
REMAIN HERE, PEOPLE WE ALL AGREE
SHOULD BE REMOVED, CRIMINAL
ALIENS AND SO ON, AND THEN
PEOPLE WHO MAY BE IN BETWEEN.
>> I MADE THE POINT THAT
ANYTHING THAT IS LEGALIZATION
ENDS UP IN CITIZENSHIP.
AND IF THAT'S THE CASE, I'M
OPPOSED TO IT BECAUSE IT
DESTROYS THE RULE OF LAW.
YOU COULD NEVER REESTABLISH THE
RULE OF LAW IN THIS COUNTRY AS
LEAST WITH REGARD TO IMMIGRATION
AGAIN.
>> Suarez: THIS MORNING, THE
LEAD AUTHORS OF THE SENATE BILL,
DEMOCRAT CHUCK SCHUMER AND
REPUBLICAN JOHN McCAIN TALKED
HOPEFULLY,FTER A MEETING WITH
PRESIDENT OBAMA AT THE WHITE
HOUSE.
>> ONCE YOU SAY DOING NOTHING IS
NOT AN OPTION, YOU HAVE TO MOVE
IN A DIRECTION TO BE BIPARTISAN.
AND ONCE YOU'RE BIPARTISAN,
YOU'RE GOING TO GET SOME
PROGRESS THAT CAN GET SOMETHING
DONE.
SO AGAIN, IT'S NOT GOING TO BE
THE SAME EXACT THING AS WE
BELIEVE, BUT AT THE END OF THE
DAY, HOPEFULLY IT'LL BE CLOSE
ENOUGH THAT WE CAN COME TO AN
AGREEMENT.
>> WE ARE IN NO WAY BIG-FOOTING
THE MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES.
WE'D LIKE TO SEE LEGISLATION
ALONG THE LINES OF OURS, BUT WE
CAN WORK WITH THEM ON DIFFERENT
PIECES OF LEGISLATION.
WE WANT LEGISLATION THAT WE CAN
GO TO CONFERENCE ON, THAT WE CAN
GET A MAJORITY VOTE IN BOTH
HOUSES.
>> Suarez: HOUSE REPUBLICANS
WILL NOW CONSIDER  FOUR SEPARATE
BILLS, WITH A CONCENTRATION ON
BORDER SECURITY AND ENFORCEMENT
OF EXISTING LAWS.
NONE OFFERS THE POSSIBILITY OF
CITIZENSHIP.
BUT MINORITY LEADER NANCY PELOSI
WARNED TODAY OF THE CONSEQUENCES
OF NOT ACTING QUICKLY.
>> I THINK DELAY CAN CREATE
PROBLEMS, BUT I'M EVER-
OPTIMISTIC.
SO I BELIEVE THAT WE WILL HAVE
IMMIGRATION REFORM FOR THE
SIMPLE REASON THAT THE AMERICAN
PEOPLE WANT US TO HAVE IT, AND
THAT IF IT DOESN'T HAPPEN IN
THIS YEAR, IT'S UNLIKELY THAT
IT'S GOING TO HAPPEN IN AN
ELECTION YEAR.
>> Suarez: REPUBLICANS HAVE
TALKED OF VOTING ON IMMIGRATION
BEFORE THE MONTH-LONG RECESS
THAT BEGINS IN EARLY AUGUST.
BUT BOEHNER SEEMED TO LEAVE SOME
WIGGLE ROOM TODAY.
>> I'M MUCH MORE CONCERNED ABOUT
DOING IT RIGHT THAN I AM OF
MEETING SOME DEADLINE.
>> Suarez: IF ACTION ON
IMMIGRATION SLIDES TO THE FALL,
FISCAL BATTLES OVER THE FEDERAL
BUDGET AND DEBT CEILING COULD
SIDELINE THE ISSUE INDEFINITELY.
AND TO THE NEXT IN OUR
IMMIGRATION CONVERSATIONS.
EARLIER THIS WEEK, WE TALKED
WITH HOUSE REPUBLICANS TREY
GOWDY OF SOUTH CAROLINA AND RAUL
LABRADOR OF IDAHO, ALONG WITH
ILLINOIS DEMOCRAT LUIS
GUTIERREZ.
TONIGHT, ANOTHER DEMOCRAT:
ARIZONA'S RAUL GRIJALVA.
HE IS A MEMBER OF THE
CONGRESSIONAL HISPANIC CAUCUS,
AND SERVES AS CO-CHAIR OF THE
CONGRESSIONAL PROGRESSIVE
CAUCUS.
I SPOKE WITH HIM YESTERDAY.
CONGRESSMAN GRIJALVA, WELCOME TO
THE PROGRAM.
A LOT OF ATTENTION IS BEING PAID
TO WHETHER REPUBLICANS WILL GO
FOR THE SENATE BILL IN THE HOUSE
BUT I THOUGHT SINCE YOU'RE
CO-CHAIR OF THE PROGRESSIVE
CAUCUS WE SHOULD ASK YOU WHETHER
DEMOCRATS IN THE HOUSE ARE HAPPY
WITH THE CHANGES THAT WERE MADE
TO THE BILL TO GET IT THROUGH
SENATE?
>> WELL, I THINK A GREAT DEAL OF
DISCOMFORT, SOME OUTRIGHT
OPPOSITION TO THE SEARCH.
IS AMENDMENT THAT ADDED $30
BILLION PLUS, DOUBLED EVERYTHING
THAT WAS ALREADY IN THE BILL AND
FOR MANY, FOR ENVIRONMENTALISTS
AND PEOPLE THAT CARE ABOUT THOSE
PUBLIC LAND LAWS-- CLEAN WATER,
CLEAN AIR-- THE WAIVING OF THOSE
LAWS ALONG THE BORDER AND PUBLIC
LANDS, PEOPLE HAVE DIFFICULTY
WITH THAT.
THE ISSUE OF JUST MILITARIZING
THE BORDER TO AN EXTENT THAT IT
BECOMES ALMOST A COMBAT ZONE
WILL CHANGE THE TEXTURE AND THE
LIFE IN THE THAT COMMUNITY
FOREVER.
I THINK IT'S OVERKILL.
I THINK WE NEED TO DEFINE WHAT
SECURITY IS AND I THINK IT
INCLUDES MUCH MORE COMPONENTS
THAN BOOTS ON THE GROUND THAN
DRONES AND HELICOPTERS AND
SENSORS AND TOWERS AND FENCES.
IT INCLUDES MUCH MORE.
BUT THE DEFINITION IS VERY
NARROW.
WE'LL MAKE AN EFFORT TO TRY TO
EXPAND THAT DEFINITION BUT THE
BOTTOM LINE, RAY, IS THAT A LOT
OF THE SWALLOWING AND BITTERNESS
OF SOME OF THESE ADDITIONS BY
THE SENATOR AND EVEN SOME OF THE
COMPONENTS THAT WERE IN THE
SENATE BILL BEFORE WERE BEING
SWALLOWED BECAUSE OF THE
EMPLOYMENTS OF THE PATH TO
CITIZENSHIP.
>> Suarez: YOU CALL IT A BITTER
FOIL SWALLOW.
DOES IT STILL HAVE YOUR VOTE AS
WRITTEN IF IT CAME TO THE HOUSE
FLOOR?
>> IF IT CAME TO THE HOUSE
FLOOR-- AND AT THIS POINT I HAVE
A GREAT DEAL OF DISCOURT WITH
IT.
I FEEL THAT -- I'VE BEEN
RELUCTANT TO STATE WHAT I WOULD
DO IN THAT SITUATION SO WE
WOULDN'T MARGINALIZE THE
OPPORTUNITY TO IMPROVE IT.
BUT A LOT WILL DEPEND ON WHAT
THE REPUBLICANS DO HERE.
IF WE START TO REDEFINE PATH,
THE ONLY SLOW REASON FOR ANY
COMPROMISE OR SWALLOWING ANY OF
THIS HAS BEEN THE MILLIONS OF
PEOPLE THAT WE WOULD ADD COMFORT
AND PROTECTION TO.
IF THAT STARTS TO LEAVE, QUITE
FRANKLY, THERE'S NO COMPROMISE.
>> Suarez: IS THE PATH TO
CITIZENSHIP-- SOME PATH TO
CITIZENSHIP-- A NECESSARY
VERSION OF THIS BILL TO GET YOUR
VOTE IN
>> MY VOTE AND I THINK THAT
GREAT NUMBER OF DEMOCRATS.
THE SENTIMENT I'M GIVING YOU,
RAY, ABOUT WE DON'T LIKE THIS
PART, WE DON'T LIKE THAT PART IS
PRETTY PREVALENT, BUT, YOU KNOW
THE GOLDEN OPPORTUNITY TO DO
SOMETHING T REPRESENT 350 MILESF
BORDER, COMMUNITIES ALL THOSE
COMMUNITIES AND CONSTANTLY
EVERYDAY DEALING WITH THOSE
FAMILIES, THE SPLIT FAMILIES,
CHILDREN LEFT IN FOSTER CARE
BECAUSE THEIR PARENTS ARE GONE.
I MEAN, THE HUMAN TOLL SOMETIMES
MAKES YOU -- MAKES YOU BELIEVE
THAT THAT IS -- HAS TO BE THE
ULTIMATE GOAL AND IF THAT PATH
ISN'T THERE THEN WHAT ARE WE
SETTLING FOR?
>> Suarez: EARLIER IN THE WEEK
CONGRESSMAN TREY GOWDY, YOUR
REPUBLICAN COLLEAGUE FROM SOUTH
CAROLINA WAS ON THIS PROGRAM AND
HE SAID THE PATH TO CITIZENSHIP
IS NOT AS IMPORTANT TO HIM AS
SECURING THE BORDER RIGHT NOW
BECAUSE UNLESS YOU SECURE THE
BORDER YOU END UP BACK IN THE
SAME PROBLEM WE'RE IN NOW WITH
NEWLY LEGALIZED RESIDENTS AND
MORE PEOPLE COMING OVER THE
BORDER TRYING TO ACHIEVE THAT
STATUS.
HOW DO YOU REPLY TO THAT?
>> I THINK THAT WAS THE SENATE
BILL.
THERE'S E-VERIFY THAT'S GOING TO
MAKE A DEMAND OF EMPLOYERS THAT
PEOPLE MUST HAVE THE PROPER
DOCUMENTATION OTHERWISE THE
PENALTIES ON THOSE EMPLOYERS
THAT HIRE UNAUTHORIZED PEOPLE IS
GOING TO BE HUGE.
BEYOND THAT, YOU KNOW, PEOPLE
ARE COMING OUT OF THE SHADOWS,
DECLARING THEMSELVES, STARTING
THAT PROCESS, FAMILY UNIFICATION
MUCH -- 40% OF THE PEOPLE THAT
ARE RIGHT NOW IN THIS COUNTRY
OVERSTAYED THEIR WORK VISAS OR
OVERSTAYED THEIR VISAS AND, AS
YOU SEAL THIS BORDER AND AS YOU
TRY TO FEEL THAT THE ONLY WAY
YOU CAN PROVIDE IMMIGRATION
REFORM IS BY A ZERO-TOLERANCE
SECURE BORDER FENCES, BORDER
PATROL AGENTS SHOULDER TO
SHOULDER, THAT'S NAIVE THINKING.
THAT'S NOT THE REALITY OF THE
BORDER.
AND THE REALITY OF THE ECONOMY
OF THE NATION AND THIS WORLD,
THE AFFECT OF POVERTY, THERE'S
ROOT CAUSES HERE AND NEARLY
BUILDING THE FENCES.
SYMBOLISM, IT'S PANDERING AND
GOOD POLITICAL RHETORIC BUT IT
IS NOT GOING TO FIX OR
ACCOMMODATE THE ISSUE THAT WE'RE
DEALING WITH WITH HERE WHICH IS
THAT THE PEOPLE THAT ARE HERE
ALREADY AND WHAT DO YOU DO ABOUT
THEM?
HE DOESN'T ANSWER THAT QUESTION.
AND HIS IDEA OF KEEPING PEOPLE
HERE WITH A PROVISIONAL LEGAL
STATUS IS SOMETHING THAT'S SO
UN-AMERICAN.
TV SECOND-CLASS OF WORKERS AND
PEOPLE IN THIS COUNTRY WITH NO
ACCESS TO CITIZENSHIP AND, MORE
IMPORTANTLY, WITH A DIFFERENT
SET OF RIGHTS AND PROTECTIONS
THAN THE REST OF US HAVE.
I DON'T THINK THAT'S AMERICAN.
I DON'T THINK -- WE'VE NEVER
BEEN ABOUT THAT.
I THINK HE MISSES THE POINT ON
THAT VALUE.
BUT SECURING THE BORDER FROM
SOMEBODY FROM A STATE THAT
DOESN'T HAVE TO DEAL WITH IT ON
A DAILY BASIS IT'S NOT JUST
OVERREACH, I THINK IT'S
OVERSIMPLIFICATION.
>> Suarez: SO VERY, VERY QUICKLY
BEFORE WE GO, CONGRESSMAN.
IS THERE A COMPROMISE FLOATING
OUT THERETO THAT WILL LEAVE
PEOPLE LIKE CONGRESSMAN GOWDY
SATISFIED ABOUT THE BORDER AND
ITS SECURITY AND LEAVE THE
MEMBERS OF YOUR PROGRESSIVE
CAUCUS SATISFIED THAT YOU'VE
DONE WELL BY THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
HERE STRUGGLING TRYING TO GET
LEGAL STATUS?
>> YEAH, I THINK A PATH HAS TO
BE INTEGRAL.
REDEFINING WHAT YOU MEAN BY
SECURITY SO THAT WE MAKE A
COMPREHENSIVE SO THE ISSUES THAT
THE GENTLEMAN FROM SOUTH
CAROLINA IS CONCERNED ABOUT WE
USE PART OF SECURITY HAS TO BE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT.
SIX MILLION JOBS IN THIS COUNTRY
DEPEND ON DIRECT TRADE IMPORT
AND EXPORT FROM MEXICO.
IN THE COUNTRY.
AND SO THIS IS ABOUT JOBS, THIS
IS ABOUT A VITALITY THAT WE NEED
IN THE BORDER LANDS IN TERMS OF
AN ECONOMY.
WE NEED TO REDEFINE THAT.
I THINK THAT'S THE COMPROMISE
THAT YOU EXPAND THE DEFINITION
OF SECURITY FROM THE SIMPLE ON
THE STUFF THAT WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT RIGHT NOW-- FENCES AND
BOOTS-- TO THE MORE COMPLEX AND
LASTING SOLUTIONS WHICH IS THE
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT, GOOD PORTS
OF ENTRIES, INCREASED TRADE,
INCREASED VISITORSHIP.
IT'S A WIN-WIN FOR EVERYBODY.
AND IF THERE WAS AN OPPORTUNITY
TO SIT DOWN AND HAVE A RATIONAL
DISCUSSION WITHOUT POSTURING I
THINK THAT'S THE POTENTIAL WE
COULD COMPROMISE.
>> Suarez: CONGRESSMAN RAUL
GRIJALVA OF ARIZONA, THANK YOU
FOR JOINING US.
>> THANK YOU, RAY, APPRECIATE
IT.
>> Suarez: ALL OF OUR
CONVERSATIONS WITH SENATORS AND
HOUSE MEMBERS ARE ARCHIVED ON
OUR IMMIGRATION PAGE.
ALSO THERE, LEARN MORE ABOUT
WHAT'S IN THE LEGISLATION.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, TO EGYPT,
AMONG THE DEMONSTRATORS WHO JAM
TAHRIR SQUARE EVERY DAY ARE
HUNDREDS OF WOMEN.
THEY FACE A VERY DISTURBING
THREAT, FROM GANGS OF MEN WHO
SEXUALLY ASSAULT FEMALE
PROTESTERS.
LINDSEY HILSUM OF "INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS" REPORTS FROM
CAIRO.
AND A WARNING: YOU MAY FIND SOME
OF THE DETAILS AND THE IMAGES IN
HER STORY DISTRESSING.
>> Reporter: SUCH SWEET BOYS
FULL OF ENERGY AND FUN.
THEY'VE JUST BEEN CHASING A
YOUNG WOMAN UP THE STREET.
THE INTERVIEWER ASKS THEM WHY.
"IF A LADY IS RESPECTABLE, NO
ONE WILL HARASS HER," SAYS A KID
IN RED.
THE OTHERS PILE IN.
"WHY DO THEY WEAR SHORT SKIRTS
OR TIGHT TROUSERS?
SOME YOUNG WOMEN WHEN WE FLIRT
WITH THEM SMILE."
THAT'S HOW IT STARTS.
THIS IS HOW IT ENDS.
A MOB ATTACKS A YOUNG WOMAN ON A
CORNER OF TAHRIR SQUARE.
WE'VE DISGUISED HER IDENTITY
WHICH WAS ONE OF MORE THAN A
HUNDRED ASSAULTS IN TAHRIR
SQUARE DURING LAST WEEK'S
DEMONSTRATIONS.
THIS IS THE VERY PLACE.
WOMEN STILL COME TO THE SQUARE
BUT IT'S DANGEROUS.
THIS CORNER OF TAHRIR SQUARE HAS
BECOME NOTORIOUS FOR ATTACKS ON
WOMEN.
I CAN ONLY COME HERE TONIGHT
BECAUSE IT'S ALMOST EMPTY
BECAUSE OF RAMADAN AND PEOPLE
ARE PRAYING.
AND I'VE GOT A WHISTLE TO
PROTECT ME AND AN ALARM AND A
WHOLE CREW OF PEOPLE AROUND ME.
THAT'S NOT THE CASE FOR MANY
WOMEN WHO COME HERE.
AND THE MOST HORRIFIC THING I'VE
HEARD IS THAT THESE ATTACKS ARE
PLANNED AND SOMETIMES WOMEN
THINK THAT THE MEN COMING FOR
THEM ARE TRYING TO SAVE THEM
FROM BEING ASSAULTED BUT IN FACT
THEY TAKE THEM AWAY AND ATTACK
THEM AGAIN.
A LONG DARNING NEEDLE.
JANET ABDEL ALEEN AND HER GROUP
OF ACTIVISTS DISTRIBUTE THE
NEEDLES TO WOMEN FOR SELF
DEFENSE.
SHE AND HER COLLEAGUE NADA WERE
ASSAULTED IN TAHRIR SQUARE LAST
NOVEMBER.
>> ( translated ): THEY WERE
PUTTING THEIR HANDS INTO MY
PANTS AND INTO NADA'PANTS S AND
INSIDE MY BLOUSE TOUCHING ME
EVERYWHERE.
THERE WERE ABOUT 15 TO 20 PEOPLE
WHO SAID THEY WERE TRYING TO
PROTECT US BUT THEY SUDDENLY
STARTED TO ATTACK US.
>> Reporter: TODAY THE MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD ARE ON THE STREETS.
THE WOMEN TELL ME IT'S THE
SECULARISTS IN TAHRIR SQUARE NOT
RELIGIOUS MEN WHO DO IT.
>>NO,  THAT'S IN TAHRIR SQUARE.
NOT HERE.
120 WOMEN GET RAPED IN TAHRIR
SQUARE BECAUSE I DON'T KNOW
WHICH KIND OF PEOPLE IS GOING TO
TAHRIR SQUARE.
MAYBE IT'S THE PEOPLE THEY FREE
THEM WHEN THEY OPEN PRISONS.
>> Reporter: BUT BOTH POLITICAL
FACTIONS HAVE TRIED TO
INTIMIDATE WOMEN OFF THE STREETS
AT DIFFERENT TIMES.
AND THE MUSLIM BROTHERHOOD
BLOCKED A LAW ON VIOLENCE
AGAINST WOMEN.
LAW AND ORDER COLLAPSED UNDER
THEIR RULE SO VOLUNTARY GROUPS
HAVE HAD TO STEP IN.
>> WE'RE DOING THE JOB OF THE
POLICE.
WE'RE DOING THE JOB OF PEOPLE
WHO ARE IN POWER WHO SHOULD BE
RESPONSIBLE FOR THIS.
>> Reporter: ZEINAB IS PLANNING
TO JOIN HER MALE COLLEAGUES
INTERVENING TO SAVE WOMEN BEING
ATTACKED IN TAHRIR SQUARE.
BECAUSE THE VICTIMS NOW FEAR
THAT RESCUERS MAY IN FACT TURN
OUT TO BE RAPISTS.
>> I REACHED THE POINT WHERE I
DON'T GET SCARED ANYMORE.
NOW WHEN SOMEONE TOUCHES ME WHEN
I'M TRYING TO NOT INTERVENE OR
PATROLLING AT LEAST OR ANYTHING
LIKE, IT'S NEVER FINE.
I KNOW IT'S PART OF THE JOB.
IT'S SOMETHING YOU CANNOT
PREVENT FOR NOW BUT WHEN IT
COMES TO INTERVENING, I SAW
CASES.
I SAW VICTIMS AND IT'S
TRAUMATIZING AND I FEEL THEM AND
I FEEL THAT IT'S NOT, YOU CANNOT
TRUST A MAN ANYMORE.
>> Reporter: POVERTY,
UNEMPLOYMENT, SEGREGATION OF THE
SEXES.
MANY FACTORS CONTRIBUTE TO
ENDEMIC SEXUAL HARASSMENT IN
EGYPT.
THE DEPRIVATION IN SOCIAL
ATTITUDES ARE NOT THE ONLY
CAUSES.
>> ( translated ): THE PROBLEM
IS, THERE'S NO LAW AGAINST THIS.
PEOPLE KNOW IF THEY GO INTO THE
SQUARE AND TOUCH WOMEN THEY WILL
NOT BE PUNISHED.
ALSO THESE WOMEN ARE BLAMED FOR
BEING HARASSED.
WE SHOULDN'T BLAME WOMEN FOR
THIS.
>> Reporter: IN TAHRIR SQUARE
THEY'RE HOLDING RAMADAN PRAYERS
JUST NEXT TO THE PLACE WHERE
WOMEN ARE FREQUENTLY RAPED.
MOB ASSAULT AND ESCALATION OF
HARASSMENT ARE THE UNINTENDED
COEQUENSNCE OF A REVOLUTION THAT
WAS MEANT TO LIBERATE EGYPTIANS-
- MEN AND WOMEN ALIKE.
>> Suarez: THE MUSLIM
BROTHERHOOD AND OTHER GROUPS ARE
CALLING FOR A "MILLION MAN"
DEMONSTRATION TOMORROW IN CAIRO.
IT'S AIM IS TO PROTEST PRESIDENT
MORSI'S OUSTER AND CLASHES WITH
EGYPT'S MILITARY THAT LEFT MORE
THAN 50 PEOPLE DEAD.
>> Sreenivasan: NEARLY A WEEK
AFTER A RUNAWAY TRAIN DERAILED
AND TRIGGERED AN ENORMOUS
EXPLOSION IN A TINY TOWN IN
CANADA, THERE ARE GROWING
QUESTIONS AND ANGER ABOUT WHAT
LED TO THE TRAGEDY.
ALL THIS WEEK, CREWS HAVE
SEARCHED THE BURNED OUT WRECKAGE
IN THE LITTLE TOWN OF LAC-
MEGANTIC.
AUTHORITIES BELIEVE THE FINAL
DEATH TOLL WILL REACH 50, MAKING
IT CANADA'S WORST RAILWAY
DISASTER IN NEARLY 150 YEARS.
IT BEGAN EARLY SATURDAY, WITH
PLES OUMF BLACK SMOKE AND FIRE,
AFTER A RUNAWAY TRAIN HAULING
CRUDE OIL ROLLED DOWN A SEVEN
MILE ILINNCE.
THE DERAILED DERAILED IN THE
CENTER OF TOWN,  WHERE AT LEAST
FIVE CARS EXPLODED, BURNING DOWN
30 BUILDINGS.
>> IT WAS LIKE A DAY LIGHT.
IT CAME SO LIGHT.
IT WAS LIKE THE SUN LIGHT AND I
HEARD A LOT OF DETONATIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: YESTERDAY EDWARD
BURKHARDT, CHAIRMAN OF THE
COMPANY THAT OWNS MONTREAL,
MAINE AND ATLANTIC RAILWAY ,
TRAVELED TO LAC-MEGANTIC FOR THE
FIRST TIME SINCE THE DISASTER.
>> BURKHARDT!
>> Sreenivasan: HE FACED ANGRY,
GRIEVING TOWNSPEOPLE, AND
SOUNDED A NOTE OF CONTRITION.
>> I WOULD FEEL THE SAME WAY IF
SOMETHING LIKE THIS HAPPENED IN
MY COMMUNITY.
BEYOND THAT, I DON'T KNOW WHAT
TO SAY.
>> Sreenivasan: BURKHARDT HAS
ALSO COME UNDER SHARP CRITICISM
FROM QUEBEC PREMIER PAULINE
MAROIS, WHO VISITED LAC MEGANTIC
TODAY.
>> ( translated ): IT SEEMS TO
ME THAT GOES WITHOUT SAYING.
HE SHOULD HAVE BEEN THERE TO
BETTER COMMUNICATE WITH THE
POPULATION.
THEY HAVE MANY QUESTIONS TO ASK
AND ALSO WITH THE MUNICIPAL
AUTHORITIES THEY HAVE ALL KINDS
OF QUESTIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE MEANTIME,
IT'S STILL UNCLEAR WHAT CAUSED
THE DISASTER.
THE CANADIAN TRANSPORTATION
SAFETY BOARD SAYS JUST AN HOUR
BEFORE THE WRECK, THE TRAIN WAS
IN A NEARBY TOWN, WHEN AN ENGINE
PROVIDING PRESSURE TO THE AIR
BRAKES CAUGHT FIRE.
LOCAL FIREMEN RESPONDED.
>> THE ENGINE WAS SHUT DOWN AT
ABOUT MIDNIGHT.
THE FIRE WAS EXTINGUISHED.
AND THE TRAIN STARTS TO MOVE AT
APPROXIMATELY 00:56 AFTER
MIDNIGHT.
>> Sreenivasan: BURKHARDT
SUGGESTED YESTERDAY THAT THE
FIREFIGHTERS APPARENTLY CHANGED
SWITCHES IN THE TRAIN'S CAB.
>> SOMEBODY TAMPERED WITH IT.
WE LATER FOUND OUT, WE DIDN'T
KNOW AT THE TIME, THAT IT WAS
THE NANTE'S FIRE DEPARTMENT.
DID THEY DO THIS MALICIOUSLY OR
ON PURPOSE?
ABSOLUTELY NOT.
THEY DID WHAT THEY THOUGHT WAS
CORRECT.
IT WAS AN IMPORTANT CAUSAL
FACTOR IN THIS WHOLE THING.
>> Sreenivasan: WITH ITS AIR
BRAKES DISABLED, THE TRAIN WAS
NOW DEPENDENT ON MANUAL, HAND
BRAKES.
BUT BURKHARDT SAYS HE BELIEVES
THE TRAIN'S ENGINEER FAILED TO
SET THEM PROPERLY.
>> WE THINK HE APPLIED SOME HAND
BRAKES, THE QUESTION IS DID HE
APPLY ENOUGH OF THEM?
HE'S TOLD US THAT HE APPLIED 11
HAND BRAKES AND OUR GENERAL
FEELING IS THAT THAT'S NOT--
NOW, THAT THAT IS NOT TRUE.
INITIALLY, WE TOOK HIM AT HIS
WORD.
>> Sreenivasan: THE ENGINEER HAS
NOT SPOKEN PUBLICLY.
BUT QUEBEC POLICE HAVE NOW
OPENED A CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION
INTO THE DERAILMENT.
NANCY WOOD IS AN ANCHOR WITH THE
CANADIAN BROADCASING CORPORATION
WHO IS COVERING THIS STORY.
SHE JOINS US FROM MONTREAL.
THANKS FOR BEING WITH US.
LET'S START WITH AN UPDATE ON
THE INVESTIGATION.
WHAT'S THE LATEST THAT YOU HAVE
TONIGHT?
>> WELL, WE KNOW THAT THE POLICE
HAVE TOLD US NOW THERE ARE 24
CONFIRMED DEAD.
BUT THEY HAVE TOLD THE FAMILIES
AND THE FRIENDS OF THAT SMALL
TOWN OF ABOUT
2,000 THAT THE 50 PEOPLE WHO ARE
OFFICIALLY MISSING ARE DEAD.
IT'S JUST THAT AS THEY COME
ACROSS REMAINS THEY CAN NOW SAY
"WE HAVE 24."
AND THEY HAVE RELEASED THE
IDENTITY OF THE FIRST PERSON
OFFICIALLY, THAT'S A 93-YEAR-OLD
WOMAN.
HER FAMILY SAYS SHE WANTED TO
STAY IN HER HOME, SHE WAS QUITE
SPRY AND LIVELY BUT NOT SPRY YOU
HAVE NO RUN THAT FAST.
AS IT HAPPENED AT 1:00 IN THE
MORNING, UNLESS YOU WERE AWAKE,
YOU HAD NO CHANCE OF GETTING OUT
AND THE PEOPLE WHO WERE IN A
SMALL CAFE, OF COURSE, COULDN'T
GET OUT QUICKLY ENOUGH.
BUT SOME PEOPLE DID MANAGE TO
RUN.
OTHERS LIKE THIS WOMAN, NO.
AND AS FOR THE INVESTIGATION,
YOU WERE ASKING ME ABOUT, THAT I
SHOULD GO BACK TO THAT.
THEY ARE INTERVIEWING PEOPLE.
THEY INTERVIEWED EDWARD
BURKHARDT.
THEY ARE TREATING THE SCENE AS A
CRIME SCENE AND THAT'S WHY THEY
KEPT PEOPLE AWAY FROM IT FOR SO
LONG.
AND THAT MADE PEOPLE IN THE
COMMUNITY VERY FRUSTRATED
BECAUSE THEY WANTED TO SEE IT.
BUT THEY'RE NOT TELLING US
DETAILS OF WHAT KIND OF CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATION.
IT COULD BE CRIMINAL NEGLIGENCE,
IT COULD BE ANYTHING ELSE BUT
THEY'RE NOT TELLING US.
>> Sreenivasan: IS IT ROUTINE
FOR IT TO BE A CRIMINAL
INVESTIGATION.
DOES IT GIVE THEM DIFFERENT PRIX
SEED YURL OPTIONS?
WHY WOULD THEY DO THAT?
>> WELL, I THINK'S NOTHING
ROUTINE ABOUT THIS KIND OF
DISASTER AND SO EVEN THE
PROVINCIAL POLICE FORCE IS
SAYING THEY HAVE NEVER DEALT
WITH THIS MAGNITUDE OF DISASTER
WITH 50 PEOPLE KILLED IN A TOWN
OF
2,000 AND BASICALLY THE DOWNTOWN
OF THIS PLACE OBLITERATED.
SO CLEARLY SOMETHING WENT WRONG
AND I GUESS THEY'VE DECIDED
THEY'RE GOING TO TREAT IT AS
CRIMINAL BUT THEY WON'T TELL US
WHY.
>> Suarez: LET'S TALK ABOUT THIS
ENGINEER AND THE BRAKES
QUESTION.
IT'S JUST KIND OF COMING INTO
THE LIGHT NOW THAT THERE WAS A
PROBLEM WITH THE TRAIN AHEAD OF
TIME.
IS THIS A HE SAID/SHE SAID OF
THE FIRE DEPARTMENT VERSUS THE
C.E.O.?
>> WHAT'S INTERESTING IS THE
FIRST WE HEARD FROM EDWARD
BURKHARDT WAS MUCH EARLIER IN
THE WEEK WHERE HE CLEARLY PUT
THE BLAME ON THE TOWN'S FIRE
DEPARTMENT AND THE FIRE
DEPARTMENT HIT RIGHT BACK.
THEY SAID ABSOLUTELY NOT, THERE
WAS A FIRE, THERE HAVE BEEN
SEVERAL FIRES ON M.M.A. TRAINS
OVER THE LAST FEW YEARS, WE CAME
IN, WE EXTINGUISHED THE FIRE, WE
CALLED THE RAILWAY.
THE RAILWAY SENT PERSONNEL AND
WE LEFT THAT TRAIN IN ITS PLACE
WITH PERSONNEL ON BOARD THEN
M.M.A. SAID THERE'D BEEN
TAMPERING WITH THE TRAIN AND NOW
THEY'RE SAYING IT WAS THE FIRE
DEPARTMENT THAT DISENGAGED THE
AIR BREAK AND THE ENGINEER
SHOULD HAVE SET THE HAND BRAKES
AND THE ENGINEER SAID HE DID.
ALTHOUGH HE'S VANISHED.
HE'S NOW NOT WORKING, OFF WORK
AND NOT TALKING TO ANYBODY.
>> Sreenivasan: IS IT USUAL FOR
THERE TO BE JUST ONE ENGINEER ON
A TRAIN LIKE THIS?
>> NO.
M.M.A. IS ONE OF TWO RAILROADS
THAT HAS PERMISSION TO OPERATE
WITH SINGLE-PERSON CREWS.
EDWARD BURKHARDT HAS A
REPUTATION IN THE RAIL INDUSTRY
AS SOMEONE WHO MAKES RAILROADS
MORE EFFICIENT.
AND MORE EFFICIENT USUALLY MEANS
COST CUTTING AND THIS IS THE
CASE.
HE CUT SALARIES BY 40% WHEN HE
TOOK OVER THIS RAILROAD IN 2003
AND ID
CREWS AND MUCH MORE REMOTE
CONTROLLED DEVICES TO MAKE UP
FOR THAT.
HE SAID IT'S MORE EFFICIENT.
IN FACT HE WAS SAYING YESTERDAY
IT'S SAFER BECAUSE THERE'S FEWER
DISTRACTION WHEN THERE'S ONLY
ONE PERSON.
BUT IN THIS CASE THE ENGINEER
HAD GOT OFF THE TRAIN, HAD GONE
TO BED IN THAT TOWN AND HE WAS
SAYING THAT THE FIRE DEPARTMENT
SHOULD HAVE GONE AND WOKEN UP
THE ENGINEER AND BROUGHT THEM TO
THE TRAIN.
THE FIRE DEPARTMENT SAYS "THIS
IS YOUR RAILROAD.
WE PUT THE FIRE OUT, WE CALLED
THE RAILROAD.
IF ANYBODY IS GOING TO CALL THE
ENGINEER, IT SHOULD BE YOU.
SO IT'S TURNING INTO A HE SAID;
SHE SAID BUT WE'RE NOT HEARING
FROM THE ENGINEER IN QUESTION.
>> Sreenivasan: WE'RE HEARING
SYRIAING IN THE CROWD OF EDWARD
BURKHARDT.
IS THIS JUST TRUST FEDERATION
THE LOCALS.
>> YOU KNOW WHAT'S ODD ABOUT
THIS IS THAT THE PRESIDENT AND
C.E.O. OF MONTREAL MAIN AND
ATLANTIC RAILWAYS HAS BEEN IN
THE TOWN SINCE SATURDAY BUT HE'S
BEEN IG COG KNEE TOE.
HE HASN'T TALKED TO PEOPLE.
HE WAS VERY UNDER THE RADAR.
SO THERE WAS NOBODY FROM THE
COMPANY PEOPLE COULD SEE.
IT'S HARD TO IMAGINE HOW YOU
COULD WORK SOMETHING OUT.
HOW YOU COULD COME IN WHEN YOUR
COMPANY HAS DONE THIS TO A TOWN
AND WIN PEOPLE OVER.
I WOULD SAY IT'S NEXT TO
IMPOSSIBLE.
BUT THE FACT THAT THEY WERE NOT
VISIBLE FOR SO LONG, THEY THEY
BLAMED OTHER PEOPLE AND THAT
THEY CAME IN AND WERE SO
IMPROVISED HE WAS JUST KIND OF
WALKING DOWN THE STREET WITH
REPORTERS AND HE TRIED TO GIVE A
NEWS CONFERENCE BUT IT TURNED
INTO A GIGANTIC SCRUM.
THE POLICE HAD TO STOP PEOPLE
FROM HECKLING.
AND IT WASN'T THE WHOLE TOWN
THAT WAS HECKLING HIM, IT WAS A
FEW PEOPLE WHO WERE VERY
FRUSTRATED AND ANGRY BUT LOT OF
PEOPLE WERE JUST WATCHING AND
CRYING AS HE TRIED TO EXPLAIN
WHAT HAPPENED.
>> Sreenivasan: THE AMERICAN
MEDIA IS DIPPING IN AND OUT OF
THIS STORY.
BUT YOU'RE THERE.
IS THIS TRANSCENDING ACROSS
CANADA?
HAS THIS SPARKED A NATIONAL
CONVERSATION ABOUT SAFETY AND
TRANSPORT?
>> YEAH.
AND YOU KNOW WHAT THE
CONVERSATION IS?
I KNOW YOU HAVE THE SAME
CONVERSATION IN THE STATES IS
OIL PIPELINES AND THERE IS A
PUSH ON TO HAVE MORE PIPELINES
ACROSS CANADA AND PEOPLE DON'T
LIKE THE IDEA OF PIPELINES.
BUT THIS HAS LED TO THE
DISCUSSION ABOUT WELL, WOULD YOU
RATHER IT WAS BY RAIL?
ON OLD TRACKS WITH SMALL
COMPANIES?
AND THE M.M.A.'S SAFETY RECORD
IS NOT A GOOD SAFETY RECORD SO
IT'S SPARKED THAT DEBATE.
IT HAS PEOPLE WONDERING WHAT IS
GOING THROUGH OUR TOWN AT 1:00
IN THE MORNING?
DO WE KNOW WHAT THE VIFK?
IT IS LITERALLY HAS PEOPLE
TALKING ABOUT EDWARD BURKHARDT
BY NAME AND HAND BRAKES AND AIR
BRAKES AND IT CERTAINLY HAS
AFFECTED CANADIANS ACROSS THE
COUNTRY.
>> Sreenivasan: NANCY WOOD FROM
THE CANADIAN BROADCASTING
CORPORATION.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> Suarez: FINALLY TONIGHT,
VIDEO GAMES, VIRTUAL REALITY AND
HOW CHANGES IN THOSE
TECHNOLOGIES MAY BE CONNECTED
WITH ECONOMIC BEHAVIOR.
"NEWSHOUR" ECONOMICS
CORRESPONDENT PAUL SOLMAN AND
PAUL'S AVATAR ARE OUR GUIDES,
PART OF HIS ONGOING REPORTING:
AKIN"MG SENSE OF FINANCIAL
NEWS."
AND YES, YOU SHOULD KNOW HIS
STORY CONTAINS SOME VIDEO GAME
VIOLENCE.
>> OH GOSH.
OH MY GOSH!
>> Reporter: VIDEOGAMES: ONE OF
THE WORLDS FASTEST-GROWING
INDUSTRIES, WITH MORE THAN $80
BILLION A YEAR IN REVENUES NOW,
MORE THAN TWICE THAT OF MOVIES.
>> THE FEELING OF DROPPING IS
REALLY AWESOME.
>> Reporter: AND AT A RECENT
DEVELOPERS CONFERENCE IN SAN
FRANCISO, THE RACE WAS ON TO TRY
OUT A BREAKTHROUGH THAT COULD
TAKE THE INDUSTRY TO AN ENTIRELY
NEW LEVEL.
>> THIS IS INSANE.
>> Reporter: THOUGH NOT YET
READY FOR RETAIL-- IT'S EXPECTED
TO SELL FOR ABOUT $300-- THE
OCULUS RIFT IS ALREADY BEING
HAILED AS THE HOLY GRAIL OF
GAMING: A LIGHTWEIGHT,
AFFORDABLE HEADSET TO DELIVER
TOTALLY IMMERSIVE VIRTUAL
REALITY OR V.R..
>> A LOT OF US GOT INTO THE GAME
INDUSTRY TO BUILD VIRTUAL WORLDS
AND TO EXPLORE, BUILD AND
EXPLORE DEEP PLACES.
AND BEING ABLE TO STEP INSIDE
THOSE PLACES FOR THE FIRST TIME
IS INCREDIBLYXCIT EING.
>> Reporter: NATE MITCHELL,
OCULUS V.R.'S 25-YEAR OLD VICE
PRESIDENT, GAVE ME A SNEAK PEAK
AT THE HEADSET, DRIVING A MECH--
A SORT OF WEAPONIZED ROBOT-- IN
A VIRTUAL REALITY VERSION OF THE
POPULAR POST-APOCALYPSE GAME
"HAWKEN."
UP, UP, UP, UP UP.
OOH, YEAH.
THIS IS PRETTY COOL, THIS IS
THE SPLIT SCREEN IMAGES-- WHAT
I'M SEEING IN EACH EYE--  DON'T
COME CLOSE TO CAPTURING THE
EXPERIENCE.
BUT BE-GOGGLED, I WAS VIRTUALLY
WITHIN "HAWKEN'S" MAD MAX WORLD
THERE WE GO.
GOT THE TOWER.
PRETTY MILD FOR VIDEO GAME
VIOLENCE.
BUT STILL...
DO YOU WORRY ABOUT POSSIBLE
MISUSE OR ABUSE OF THIS
TECHNOLOGY?
>> THERE'S ALWAYS GOING TO BE
PEOPLE THAT USE TECHNOLOGY IN
WEIRD WAYS, THAT YOU DON'T WANT
TO TAP INTO.
BUT TO BE HONEST, YOU KNOW, OUR
WE TRY TO LEAVE IT TO DEVELOPERS
TO CHOOSE THE CONTENT THEY'RE
BUILDING.
AND PEOPLE TO CHOOSE WHAT THEY
WANT TO PLAY.
>> Reporter: BUT WHAT WILL THEY
CHOOSE?
>> WE ARE ENTERING AN ERA THAT
IS UNPRECEDENTED IN HUMAN
HISTORY.
>> Reporter: JEREMY BAILENSON
RUNS STANFORD UNIVERSITY'S
VIRTUAL HUMAN INTERACTION LAB.
WHILE PART OF THE LAB'S MISSION
IS TO PERFECT THE TECHNOLOGY,
ITS MAIN PURPOSE IS TO GET A
HANDLE ON V.R.'S PSYCHOLOGICAL
EFFECTS, NOW THAT IT'S ABOUT TO
HIT THE CONSUMER MASS MARKET.
>> IN THIS WORLD IN WHICH YOU
CAN TRANSFORM THE SELF AND HAVE
ANY EXPERIENCE THAT AN ANIMATOR
CAN FATHOM, WHAT ARE THE
CONSEQUENCES TO THE SELF; WHAT
ARE THE CONSEQUENCES TO SOCIETY.
>> Reporter: S THIAT AS RADICAL
A CHANGE AS YOUR LANGUAGE
SUGGESTS?
>> YES.
WE CANNOT UNDERESTIMATE HOW
RADICAL THIS CHANGE IS.
VIDEO GAME VIOLENCE RESEARCH
SHOWS THAT IF YOU PUT SOMEBODY
IN A VIRTUAL SCENE THAT'S NASTY
AND VIOLENT, THEY BEHAVE MORE
AGGRESSIVELY IN THE PHYSICAL
WORLD.
>> WHAT WE NEED TO DO IS TO
THINK ABOUT THE WONDERFUL THINGS
WE CAN DO IN THESE VIRTUAL
WORLDS THAT CAN MAKE THE WORLD A
BETTER PLACE.
>> Reporter: SO BAILENSON HAS
DEDICATED HIS STANFORD LAB TO
HE'S DESIGNING EXPERIMENTS TO
TRY TO DO JUST THAT.
FIRST STEP FOR PUTTING A NEW
SUBJECT INTO THOSE EXPERIMENTS:
AN ALTERNATE REALITY ALTER EGO--
A VIRTUALLY REAL ECONOMICS
CORRESPONDENT.
USING HIGH-RESOLUTION PHOTOS,
LAB MANAGER CODY KARUTZ IS
CREATING A DIGITAL DOUBLE TO
FOOL MY BRAIN INTO-- ULTIMATELY-
- CHANGING MY BEHAVIOR.
>> FOR THE FIRST TIME EVER YOU
GET TO SEE YOURSELF IN THE THIRD
PERSON AS IF IN A MIRROR EXCEPT
WE CONTROL THE MIRROR.
>> Reporter: OH MY GOD, THAT IS
SO WEIRD.
>> CODY, CAN YOU GIVE ME
DANCING?
>> Reporter: YES, AT FIRST
BLUSH, THIS SEEMS A LARK.
BUT PLACING A CONVINCING AVATAR
IN A PERSUASIVE YET MANIPULABLE
ENVIRONMENT WAS DESIGNED FOR AN
ECONOMIC PURPOSE: GETTING YOUNG
PEOPLE TO SAVE.
>> THIS STUDY LOOKED AT TAKING
AN 18-YEAR-OLD COLLEGE KID OR A
AND TRANSFORMS THEM INTO THE
BODY OF SOMEONE WHO'S OLDER.
>> Reporter: SPECIFICALLY, INTO
THE BODY OR FUTURE SELF OF A 65-
YEAR-OLD, WHICH IN MY CASE,
THE STUDY WAS DESIGNED TO SEE IF
WOULD CAUSE KIDS TO SALT AWAY
MONEY FOR RETIREMENT.
IF I'M A KID LOOKING AT THE
OLDER VERSION OF ME, THE IDEA IS
THAT I'M MAKING A NON-CONSCIOUS
CONNECTION THAT WILL STAY WITH
ME AND CHANGE MY BEHAVIOR.
>> EXACTLY.
YOU CAN TELL SOMEONE YOU WILL BE
OLDER SOME DAY BUT THE VISCERAL
EXPERIENCE OF SEEING YOUR IMAGE
IN THE MIRROR AS OLDER THAN YOU
ARE CAUSES THIS DEEP CONNECTIONS
BEHAVIOR.
>> Reporter: IN FACT, IN A 2011
PAPER, BAILENSON AND OTHERS
REPORTED THAT THOSE WHO HAD SEEN
THEIR FUTURE SELVES IN THE
VIRTUAL MIRROR SUBSEQUENTLY PUT
TWICE AS MUCH MONEY INTO A
SAVINGS ACCOUNT AS THOSE WHO
HADN'T.
AND THE RESEARCH CONTINUES.
>> IN FUTURE STUDIES, WERE
ACTUALLY GOING TO BUILD
SCENARIOS THAT SHOW YOU WHAT
FE LIWOULD BE LIKE WHEN YOU'RE
OLDER WHEN YOU DON'T HAVE MONEY.
SO A VERY VISCERAL REMINDER OF
WHAT POVERTY WOULD BE LIKE.
>> Reporter: THE GREAT HOPE FOR
SUCH FUTURE SELF EXPERIMENTATION
IS THAT IT WOULD HELP ALL
SUBJECTS TO SAVE MORANDE
SUCCEED.
COULD THAT HELP BEHAVIORALLY
REWIRE THOSE WHO HAVE TROUBLE
ACTING AS ECONOMICALLY AS THEIR
MORE PROSPEROUS PEERS, AS
EVIDENCED BY THE FAMOUS
MARSHMALLOW TEST?
KIDS WHO RESISTED THE TEMPTATION
TO EAT ONE TREAT FOR 15 MINUTES
GOT TWO TREATS AS A REWARD.
TEST SAVED MORE AND PROSPERED AS
ADULTS.
WE PUT THE QUESTION TO FAMOUS
HARVARD CHILD PSYCHOLOGIST
JEROME KAGAN: COULD A VIRTUAL
REALITY EXPERIENCE OR PERHAPS A
SPECIALLY DESIGNED GAME HAVE THE
SAME EFFECT?
>> A LOT OF THESE ARE NOVELTY
EFFECTS.
A LOT OF THESE EXPERIMENTS IN
THE LITERATURE ABOUT YOU BRING
SOMEONE IN AND YOU SHOW THEM
WHAT ITS LIKE TO BE OLD AND YOU
SAY, NOW, HOW MUCH MONEY WOULD
YOU LIKE TO GET FOR YOUR
RETIREMENT?
AND THEY GIVE A LITTLE MORE
MONEY.
BUT, BY THE TIME YOU'RE FOUR YOU
UNDERSTAND THE DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN FANTASY AND REAL LIFE.
WHEN YOU'RE IN A LABORATORY
>> Reporter: WELL, BUT WAIT,
VIRTUAL REALITY, THE VERY NAME
SUGGESTS THAT YOU CANT REALLY OR
MAY NOT REALLY BE ABLE TO
DISTINGUISH BETWEEN THE GAME
EXPERIENCE AND REAL LIFE.
>> I DOUBT THAT.
YOU CAN ALWAYS DISTINGUISH
BETWEEN BEING IN A VIRTUAL
REALITY LABORATORY AND THEN
LEAVING, CLOSING THE DOOR, AND
GOING OUTSIDE.
>> Reporter: NOT SO, SAYS JEREMY
BAILENSON.
>> VIRTUAL EXPERIENCES ARE VERY
INTENSE AND THE EFFECTS OF THEM
CAN CARRY OVER TO THE REAL
WORLD.
AH!
( LAUGHTER )
THAT'S UNBELIEVABLE
BAILENSON SAYS RESEARCH IS
BEGINNING TO SHOW THAT VIRTUAL
REALITY-- V.R.-- CAN HAVE A DEEP
AND LONG LASTING EFFECT ON
BEHAVIOR -BEYOND SAVING FOR
RETIREMENT.
>> SO NOW I'M UNDERWATER AND I'M
LOOKING AROUND AND SEEING ALL
THE BEAUTIFUL FISH.
>> Reporter: IN EXPERIMENTS,
SWIMMING WITH THE FISHES-- IN
WATER THAT TURNS FROM FAIR TO
FOUL-- MAKES PEOPLE THINK TWICE
ABOUT USING PLASTIC BAGS, WHICH
MIGHT OTHERWISE WIND UP IN THE
GREAT GARBAGE PATCH THAT'S
POLLUTING THE PACIFIC OCEAN.
AND HOW ABOUT SAWING DOWN A
VIRTUAL TREE?
ON AVERAGE, EACH AMERICAN
REQUIRES TWO VIRGIN TREES FOR A
LIFETIME OF PAMPERING WITH THAT
SQUEEZABLY SOFT, NONRECLEDCY
TOILET PAPER.
THE FEELING OF FELLING A GIANT
TREE, HOWEVER, CAN SUFFICE TO
MAKE SOME SWITCH, MAYBE EVEN
PERMANENTLY, TO THE RECYCLED
STUFF.
>> I GET CALLS FROM PEOPLE
MONTHS, MONTHS AFTER
EXPERIENCING WHAT YOU JUST
EXPERIENCED SAYING I NEVER WALK
DOWN THIS SUPERMARKET AISLE
WITHOUT THINKING ABOUT CUTTING
DOWN THIS TREE.
>> Reporter: AND WHILE WE'RE ON
THE SUBJECT OF ENVIRONMENTAL
AWARENESS...
>> WE HAVE PEOPLE GET ON ALL
FOURS.
>> Reporter: BAILENSON IS NOW
WORKING ON A STUDY THAT HAS
PEOPLE EXPERIENCE BEING COWS.
AND WHAT ARE YOU DOING THIS FOR?
>> WE'RE TRYING TO MAKE A MORE
VISCERAL CONNECTION BETWEEN AND
UNDERSTANDING ABOUT WHERE YOUR
MEAT COMES FROM AND HOW YOUR
AND YOU'RE FEELING WHAT IT'S
LIKE TO BE LED TO SLAUGHTER.
>> Reporter: LED TO SLAUGHTER?
>> YOU'RE LED TO SLAUGHTER, YES.
AND IT'S THE IDEA OF GIVING
SOMEBODY A BIGGER CONNECTION TO
THE PROCESS OF EATING MEAT.
>> Reporter: BUT WAIT A SECOND,
NOW WE'RE GETTING TO CLOCKWORK
ORANGE.
YOU'RE CREATING AN AVERSIVE
EXPERIENCE THAT IS TRYING TO
REWIRE ME.
>> I THINK V.R. IS LIKE URANIUM.
IT CAN HEAT HOMES OR IT CAN
DESTROY NATIONS.
SO IT IS ABSOLUTELY SCARY AND WE
>> Reporter: THE POWER TO
DESTROY, SAID BAILENSON, LIE NOT
IN HIS EXPERIMENTS, VETTED BY
STANFORD'S INSTITUTIONAL REVIEW
BOARD, BUT IN THE UNEXAMINED
SPREAD OF COMMERCIAL VIRTUAL
REALITY, WHERE THE LOWEST COMMON
DENOMINATOR IS LIKELY TO WIN.
>> THESE EXPERIENCES WE GIVE YOU
IN THIS LAB, FOR EXAMPLE,
CUTTING DOWN A VIRTUAL TREE,
SWIMMING THROUGH A POLLUTED
INTENSE, AND KIDS ARE PLAYING
THESE FOR HOURS A DAY.
MY JOB IS TO CREATE VIRTUAL
EXPERIENCES THAT CAN HELP, AND
ALSO TO INOCULATE THE WORLD TO
UNDERSTAND THAT WHEN YOU HAVE
THESE VIRTUAL EXPERIENCES,
THEY'RE NOT FREE.
THEY CHANGE THE WAY YOU THINK
ABOUT YOURSELF.
>> Reporter: OR, ABOUT YOUR
FUTURE SELF.
FOR BETTER OR WORSE.
>> Sreenivasan: WONDER WHAT PAUL
WOULD LOOK LIKE IF HIS IMAGE WAS
MORPHED WITH THE FACE OF
PRESIDENT OBAMA OR MITT ROMNEY?
TAKE A LOOK ON OUR WEBSITE.
ALSO THERE, READ MORE FROM
PAUL'S CONVERSATION WITH JEREMY
BAILENSON ON HOW VIRTUAL REALITY
COULD INFLUENCE POLITICAL
CHOICES.
>> Suarez: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
THE PROSECUTION WRAPPED UP ITS
CASE AGAINST GEORGE ZIMMERMAN,
CHARGED IN THE SHOOTING DEATH OF
TRAYVON MARTIN, AN UNARMED
TEENAGER, IN SANFORD, FLORIDA.
HOUSE REPUBLICANS PUSHED THROUGH
A SCALED-DOWN FARM BILL AFTER
DELAYING ACTION ON FOOD STAMPS.
AND IN IRAQ, 40 OR MORE PEOPLE
WERE KILLED IN A SERIES OF
BOMBINGS AND SHOOTINGS AS THE
MUSLIM HOLY MONTH OF RAMADAN
BEGAN.
>> Sreenivasan: AND SOME
ECONOMIC STORIES TO FIND ONLINE.
WE REPORTED THE DOW SOARED
TODAY, BUT ONE FEISTY FINANCIAL
ECONOMIST PREDICTS A MAJOR
MARKET DROP IN THE NEAR FUTURE.
FIND THAT ON MAKING SENSE.
ALSO THERE, JUST HOW IMPORTANT
IS SPEED TO HIGH-FREQUENCY STOCK
TRADING?
TRADERS WHO PAY EXTRA TO GET
DATA TWO MILLI-SECONDS AHEAD OF
OTHERS CAN END UP WITH A
SIGNIFICANT ADVANTAGE.
PLUS, A FOLLOW-UP TO OUR STORY
ABOUT HOW READING JANE AUSTEN
CAN HELP US UNDERSTAND GAME
THEORY.
ECONOMIST MICHAEL CHEH RESPONDS
TO YOUR COMMENTS.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
>> Suarez: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
I'M RAY SUAREZ.
>> Sreenivasan: AND I'M HARI
SREENIVASAN.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS, AMONG
OTHERS.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.